Arriving in Knoxville



Your first few weeks at the University of Tennessee (UT) will be busy, but we have some helpful guides that will get you settled in!


Immigration Check In


Once you arrive in Knoxville, we can complete an immigration check in. This official registers you with the Department of Homeland of Security (DHS). Your status is 
NOT 
valid until this is done, and you will not be able to get a driver’s license or complete Human Resources paperwork until this is done.


Important, 
the immigration check in is 
MANDATORY. 
You do 
NOT 
have valid status until this is done.


You can complete the immigration check in by following the instructions at 
Completing the Initial Immigration Check In
.


Transportation


Transportation in Knoxville can be very different form what you are accustomed to, and there are some adjustments that have to be be made. Some important points to remember are:




Most students will not be able to live within walking distance of the campus.


Most people travel by car in Knoxville.


Public transportation is present in Knoxville, but it takes some extra planning to use.




We have created a guide for you on 
Using Transportation in Knoxville
 that has helpful details on this process.


Campus Employment



Working on-campus can be a great way to connect with the campus community and build skills. International student on F (student) and J (exchange visitor) visas can typically work on-campus.


General Guidelines for Working On-Campus




You must maintain full-time enrollment and good academic standing in your program.


You are limited to 20 hours per week except during official university break periods and the summer.




Starting a New On-Campus Position


When you start a new on-campus job, you must work with your supervisor to complete all of the necessary steps with Human Resources in order to be legal. Most students will work with the University of Tennessee (UT) Human Resources department, but students working at Dining Services through Aramark will work with the Aramark Human Resources department. If you supervisor has questions about the steps you need to take, we have a page created with helpful information at 
Graduate Assistantships and Working On-Campus
. If this is the first time you have worked in the U.S., you will need to apply for a Social Security Number (SSN). We have a guide that will help you with this process at 
Getting a Social Security Number (SSN)
.


J-1 Exchange Visitor Requirements


If you work on-campus as a J-1 exchange visitor, you will have some additional reporting that must be done. Speak with an ISSS advisor about this for details. You can schedule an appointment at our 
Getting Advising page
.


 


Dependents



The spouse and children (under age 21) of an F-1 student may hold dependent status and accompany the student in the United States during the student’s academic program.


Each dependent receives a separate I-20/DS-2019, and must apply in person for an F-2 visa to come to the US. Dependents are eligible to stay in the United States in F-2 dependent status as long as the student maintains legal F-1 status.


I-20 Application Process for F-2 Dependents


In order to add your dependent(s) to your I-20, log in to the 
iVols portal
 with your Net ID and password. Then follow these instructions:






From the F-1 Student Services section of the iVols portal, select the Add Dependents option.








2. Fill out the Add Dependent E-form.


 




3. Fill out the Financial Documentation E-form and, if necessary, the optional GA Verification form.


Be advised that you must provide financial documentation showing enough funds for a full year of study, plus
 an additional $7,080 USD for a spouse or each child.


Once you submit the required forms in iVols, ISSS will process your request. If your documentation is sufficient, ISSS will issue an updated I-20 that includes your dependents as well as I-20s for each dependent.


DS-2019 Application Process for J-2 Dependents


The spouse and children (under age 21) of a J-1 student may hold dependent status and accompany the student in the United States during the student’s academic program.


Each dependent receives a separate I-20/DS-2019, and must apply in person for an J-2 visa to come to the US. Dependents are eligible to stay in the United States in J-2 dependent status as long as the student maintains legal J-1 status.


J-1 students should contact their 
international student advisor
 for instructions on adding a J-2 dependent.


Full-Time Enrollment



Students on an F or J visa have enrollment requirements in order to maintain valid status while studying at the University of Tennessee.


Full-Time Enrollment Chart








Student Type


Minimum Credit Hours




Maximum Online Hours








Undergraduate Students


12


3






Graduate students with no assistantship


9


3






Graduate students with assistantship of less than 20 hrs per week


9


3






Graduate students with assistantship of 20 hrs per week (50% time)


6


3








Course of Study Requirements


Regulations require that coursework be part of a course of study. Elective and additional credits are permitted, but placeholder classes are not. The following courses do NOT count as enrollment:




Use of Facilities Courses;


Audited and Withdrawn Courses.




Exceptions to Full-Time Enrollment




The summer semester is an approved break if you have enrolled at UT full-time in the spring and plan to enroll full-time in the fall.


In your final semester, you are only required to enroll in the credit hours needed to complete your program. 
Remember, 
there must be at least one-credit in-person in your final semester. You are required to complete a form to verify your final semester. We have a guide for this at 
Requesting to Enroll Below Full Time
.


Graduate students in the research phase of their program are allowed to only take thesis or dissertation hours.




Guides


We have created several resources that go into greater depth on enrollment requirements.


Understanding Enrollment Requirements for International Students


Requesting to Enroll Below Full Time


 


Healthcare at utk



The 
Student Health Center
 serves as the primary care provider for the University of Tennessee student community and provides outpatient medical care for all currently enrolled students who have paid their health fee. The health fee will be automatically assessed to undergraduate students enrolled in 12 or more credit hours and graduate students enrolled in 9 or more credit hours. CGE recommends that all other international students request that the health fee be added to their billing statement, because health care through the Student Health Center is by far the most affordable option for students. For a comprehensive list of the health care services available at the UT Student Health Center, see 
studenthealth.utk.edu/clinics-services-staff
.


The University of Tennessee also offers mental health and wellness services through the 
Counseling Center
. Many students benefit from the support provided by individual or group therapy. Students experiencing depression, homesickness, anxiety, or related issues may experience a decline in academic performance. It is best to address these problems as soon as possible. CGE encourages students to seek help from the Counseling Center. CGE advisors are able to assist students in contacting the Counseling Center when needed.

Immigration Advising



International Student and Scholar Services offers 
two
 types of advising options.


Student Drop-In Advising


This type of advising is for 5-10 minute questions and is available from 11am to 3pm, Monday through Thursday 
virtually
 via Zoom at 
https://tennessee.zoom.us/j/2238501110
.


Bookable Advising Appointments


Advising appointments are available in-person or virtually for longer questions. You can book an appointment on our 
Bookings page
.


For help with advising, please see our guide on 
Getting Advising from International Student and Scholar Services
.


Internships



There are many opportunities to add practical experience to your studies at the University of Tennessee. Your academic department can advise you on opportunities that apply to your major. In addition, the 
Center for Career Development & Academic Exploration
 is an excellent resource for opportunities. We also recommend that students create a free 
Interstride
 account. 
Interstride
 has many helpful resources for students on an F (student) visa.


How can I participate?


Students on an F-1 visa are eligible to participate in many different types of internships, experiential learning programs, practicums, and co-ops. However, you must have proper authorization before you start. Immigration regulations require that off-campus internships and other programs be authorized through Curricular Practical Training (CPT). In order to be eligible for CPT, you must meet the following requirements:




maintaining lawful F-1 status;


be in a degree-seeking program;


enrolled full-time as an F-1 student for one academic year;


be in good academic standing.




For the practical training opportunity to be eligible for approval, you must also meet with your academic or faculty advisor and determine if the opportunity meets the necessary academic criteria. The required academic academic criteria are based around three general categories.


The opportunity is required for program completion. 


This means that the CPT opportunity is part of a required practicum, internship, or work experience hours dictated by the programs academic catalog. Examples of this include required field placements for Social Work or the required internships for Supply Chain Management.


The opportunity is required for the completion of a thesis or dissertation. 


This means that the CPT opportunity directly contributes to the completion of the thesis or dissertation project.


The opportunity is integral to the completion of the program. 


This means that the CPT opportunity provides direct experiential learning and training towards the degree being awarded. In addition, the opportunity must be be highly recommended by the faculty of the program and be an opportunity that would be recommended to the majority of students completing the program.


What kind of opportunities can I participate in?


CPT opportunities can be a variety of experiences. Common opportunities include internships, practicums, field experience, and co-op programs. These opportunities can be paid or unpaid. In addition, the opportunity can be either full or part-time as defined below:


Full-Time CPT


This is a training opportunity that is for more than 20 hours a week. If you complete one total year (365 days) of full-time CPT, you will not be eligible for Optional Practical Training (OPT).


Part-Time CPT 


This is a training opportunity that is for 20 hours or less per week.


How do I apply?


We have created several guides to take you through the CPT application process.


How to Apply for CPT (for students)


Approving CPT for F-1 Students (for faculty and academic advisors)
 


Understanding CPT Compliance (for employers) 


 


 




Local Address Requirements



Immigration regulations require international students to notify ISSS of their US address after initial arrival 
and
 within 10 days of any move to a different US address.


To update an address, students can fill out the Address Update E-form in the 
iVols portal
. Filling out this form online will automatically notify ISSS of your change of address. Please don’t forget to update your address in 
MyUTK
 as well!


Frequently Asked Questions: Address Changes




Can I just update my address in MyUTK? Will ISSS be notified? 

No. You must notify ISSS directly about your local address in the US to remain legal. MyUTK does not transfer any address updates to ISSS.






I’m staying at a friend’s place temporarily while I look for a new place. Do I have to tell ISSS?

Yes. You need to complete an 
Address Update
 e-form in 
iVols
. Immigration regulations require you to provide information about where you reside at any given time, even when temporary. If you move out and find your own place within 10 days, just report your new address directly. If it takes longer than 10 days, you must report your temporary address.






I am moving from one room to another in the same residence hall. Do I need to report anything? 

Yes. You must always notify ISSS 
within 10 days
 of 
any
 
change in your residence.




Maintaining Visa Status



International students on an F or J visa have federal requirements that must be followed in order to maintain legal immigration status in the U.S. In most cases a failure to comply with these requirements means that the F or J status must be terminated by the school.


Understanding Termination


Termination of status means that the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has been notified through the Student Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS) that the F or J student no longer has legal immigration status due to a compliance issue. This is typically a very serious issue, and students facing a termination should depart the U.S. immediately. Terminations typically occur in the following situations:




Failure to enroll for full-time in-person courses for a semester;


Suspension or dismissal from a degree program;


Failure to complete a required immigration check in.




These types of terminations have immediate and serious impact on the legal status of an F or J student. Other types of terminations do not have the same implication. These types of terminations include an Authorized Early Withdrawal and a Change of Status Approved.


Authorized Early Withdrawal


Authorized Early Withdrawal is termination where a student has decided that a leave of absence (permanent or temporary) from their degree program is in their best interest. An Authorized Early Withdrawal is completed in direct consultation with an International Student and Scholar Services (ISSS) advisor. This type of termination does not indicate a violation of status. It indicates that a student, with consultation of the institution, is voluntarily ending their status and departing the country. Students who pursue an Authorized Early Withdrawal have 15 days to leave the country.


Change of Status Approved


A Change of Status Approved termination occurs when a student receives a new immigration status that replaces the F status. This does not indicate a violation of status, but it indicates the replacement of the F status with a new valid immigration status. Common examples of this include F students receiving H-1b status or Permanent Residency.


Regaining Status and Reinstatement


F and J students who have lost status may regain legal status. Meeting with an ISSS advisor is the first step in this process. There are two primary ways students can regain legal status: through re-issuance and re-entry, and reinstatement.


Re-Issuance and Re-Entry


Students who have lost status may request new immigration documents after departing the country. ISSS will issue new immigration documents if the student is still admitted and in good-standing with the University of Tennessee. The student can use the newly issued immigration documents to re-enter the U.S. and resume their studies at the next appropriate date. It is critical to note that re-entry after termination is 
NOT 
guaranteed. DHS may deny entry to persons who have previously violated U.S. immigration law.


Reinstatement


Reinstatement is an option for students who lost status due to a circumstance outside of their control. Students seeking reinstatement must meet with an ISSS advisor. If the case can be argued as a reinstatement, the student must file a petition to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) with the appropriate filing fees for adjudication. The process can take 6-9 months for resolution and approval is not guaranteed.


 


OPT on F-1



OPT is program that allows F-1 students to gain experience working in their field after graduation. OPT is authorized for 1-3 years depending on your field of study. OPT is completed at the end of your program. It is important to begin planning for OPT before your graduation date.


Applying for OPT


OPT applications involve International Student and Scholar Services (ISSS), your academic or faculty advisor, and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). Appling for OPT has multiple steps, and we recommend that you begin your application 90 days before your graduation date.


We have created a guide on the OPT process at 
How to Apply for Optional Practical Training (OPT)
.


We also require that you complete a training seminar online at 
Optional Practical Training (OPT) Seminar
.


Reporting Requirements while on OPT


All students currently on OPT must report the following information within 10 days of any change. Use the 
OPT Reporting Form
 to report the information.




Change of name or address


Beginning or ending a job


Change in name or address of the employer


Interruption or loss of employment


Change of status from F-1 to a new status


Departure from the US




Unemployment on OPT


While on OPT, a student must be employed to maintain F-1 status. Students are allowed only 90 days of unemployment. If you are approaching 90 days of unemployment, contact an international student advisor to discuss your options. These options could include leaving the US, beginning a new degree program, or changing to a different immigration status.


Training on J-1



A sponsor may give a J-1 student permission to accept employment related to their field of study. This employment, called Academic Training, may take place anywhere in the US and can be either before and/or after the student finishes their studies. College and University students who are pursuing or recently completed STEM-related studies.  The maximum total length of their academic training is capped at 36 months for STEM-related studies and 18 months for all others. However, the training  may not last longer than the time the student spent taking classes.* Students should meet with an International Student Advisor to discuss how many months of Academic Training may be available for specific circumstances.


The student must have a job offer before getting permission for Academic Training. The training is then authorized for that specific job. If a student wishes to change to a different job, they must again apply to their sponsor for permission.


Students expecting to do Academic Training at the end of their program must complete all application paperwork before their DS-2019 expires. For more information about Academic Training, contact us at 
international@utk.edu.


J-1 students should follow the following procedures to be authorized for employment under academic training:




Fill out the 
Academic Training Request—Student Form
.


Obtain the 
Academic Training Request—Advisor’s Form
 from their academic advisor.


Obtain an Employer Letter from their future employer.


Provide proof of funding to show they will be funded financially until the end of the J-1 program (including the academic training period).


Provide a copy of their current DS-2019.




Once CGE receives these documents, a CGE advisor will update the student’s SEVIS record with Academic Training authorization, extend and issue a new DS-2019, write an employment letter, and if necessary write a Social Security letter.


At the end of the Academic Training period, the student should fill out an 
Academic Training Evaluation
 form and submit it to CGE. Please direct any questions about academic training to 
David Lawson
.


 


*Exception: Students who receive a PhD may be granted up to 36 months of Academic Training.

Transfer from UTK



Immigration regulations allow an F-1 student to transfer to another university. The student must first obtain written confirmation of acceptance to another college or university. Next, the student should follow the University of Tennessee’s transfer out procedures. Finally, a CGE advisor will transfer your SEVIS record to the new university.


Transfer Out Process


Access the 
Transfer Out request form
 in 
iVols portal
. You will be required to upload a copy of your official admission letter from your new school. You should be able to provide the SEVIS school code of your new university. If the new school has a transfer-in form, please submit this to CGE when you submit the Transfer Out request.


Note: Students who graduate or complete OPT must have their SEVIS record released from the CGE to the new institution before the end of their grace period.* Immigration regulations require that students begin their new program at the new school within five months from their last program end date/last day of semester classes, or within five months from their last date of employment (if on OPT).


*The grace period for F-1 students is 60 days after graduation or OPT period.


Note: Students on OPT must have their SEVIS record released before going beyond 90 days of unemployment.


J-1 students should contact their international student advisor for instructions on transferring out of UT.


Traveling while on Visa



While you are studying at the University of Tennessee you may want to travel inside or outside the United States, such as:




to return to your home country over winter or summer break.


to explore another state or country on spring break.




But, before you pack your suitcase, there are some steps you need to take to make sure you maintain your F-1 status.


1. Traveling Inside the US


While in Knoxville and the surrounding area, students should keep their documents in a safe and secure place. If traveling outside of Knoxville, students should take all original immigration documents and their passport with them. Students should have an electronic copy of their immigration documents on their phone or mobile device. It is also a good idea to keep a paper copy and make it accessible to a trusted friend or roommate in case of an emergency or in the event that original documents are lost or stolen.


2. Traveling Outside the US


In order to re-enter the US, students must submit all valid immigration documents at the port of entry.




 Documents required for re-entry into the US




Required Documents






Valid passport
 (must have six-month future validity at time of re-entry to the US or at time of visa application)


Valid student/dependent 
visa
 (must be unexpired on date of re-entry)


Current, valid 
I-20/DS-2019 with a valid signature from ISSS
, with the correct up-to-date information



A 
travel authorization signature
, which is valid for up to 12 months.








Note: Students on authorized post-completion OPT 
must
 be eligible for re-entry according to OPT rules, and
 must
 be carrying all of the following documents:




A valid Employment Authorization Document (EAD)


A current employment/offer letter


An I-20 with travel authorization signature on page 2 that is 
no older than six months
. Travel signatures for OPT students are valid only for six months.




Students who must travel, but whose OPT application is still pending with USCIS, may use their Receipt Notice as a supporting document for re-entry. ISSS recommends that students consult with an ISSS advisor before traveling.


Dependents must carry their own original documents. If traveling separately, ISSS recommends that dependents carry copies of the primary visa holder’s documents.






Visa denial and delays



Students who are applying for an F-1 (student) visa work directly with a United States (U.S.) consular office under the supervision of the countries U.S. embassy and the Department of State.


The consular officer has the task of determining the suitability of the requested visa based on regulations, the evidence provided by the applicant, and current U.S. policy. This can cause some visas to be delayed, sent to Administrative Processing, or denied. The Bureau of Consular Affairs has a page addressing 
Visa Denials
. This is the first resource to review if you have received notice of a delay or denial.


You can find several tips on applying for a visa 
here
.


Administrative Processing and Denial under INA Section 221(g)


You may receive a denial notification marked denial under INA section 221(g). This can mean two different things:




Your visa application was incomplete and/or further documentation was needed to make a decision on your application.


Your application requires Administrative Processing.




If your application was incomplete or needed additional information, submitting the required information can be sufficient to receive an approval. The embassy or consulate will provide you with a letter stating the additional information that is needed.


If your application requires Administrative Processing, you will be notified of the next steps you must take. Administrative Processing can add a 3 to 6 month delay to your visa issuance. The Bureau of Consular Affairs provides a webpage on 
Administrative Processing
.


Understanding Administrative Processing


Administrative Processing can also indicate that an additional security clearance is needed. This is the most common cause for Administrative Processing for student visa applicants at the University of Tennessee. The additional security clearance is typically connected to either work in a science, technology, engineering, mathematics (STEM) field or connected to the country of citizenship.


Fields of study connected to Administrative processing are often related to the following fields:


Conventional Munitions

Nuclear Technology

Rocket Systems

Rocket System and Unmanned Air Vehicle (UAV) Subsystems

Navigation, Avionics and Flight Control Usable in Rocket Systems and Unmanned Air Vehicles (UAV)

Chemical, Biotechnology and Biomedical Engineering

Remote Sensing, Imaging and Reconnaissance

Advanced Computer/Microelectronic Technology

Materials Technology

Information Security

Laser and Directed Energy Systems Technology

Sensors and Sensor Technology

Marine Technology

Robotics

Urban Planning


Important, 
Administrative Processing does not mean that an application will be denied. It means that there will be a delay while the security clearance is completed. It may be necessary to work with your department and defer admission while under Administrative Processing.


Denial under Section INI 214(b)


Denial under section INI 214(b) is the most common denial for F-1 visa applicants. Denial under 214(b) means that the consular officer felt that one or more of the following applied:




Failure to establish non-immigrant intent.


Failure to show connections to applicant’s home country.


Failure to establish that the stay in the U.S. will be temporary.


Failure to establish sufficient proof of funding.


Failure to establish that the applicant intends to engage in study.




Denial under 214(b) can often be overcome with additional evidence. See the The Bureau of Consular Affairs page on 
Visa Denials
 for more information.


Who can help me with a visa denial?


Overcoming a visa denial can be challenging. If a denial can be overcome, it typically involves submitting additional proof and documentation as requested by the consular officer. It is possible to engage legal counsel, but this is typically not recommended. If you choose to engage legal counsel, we recommend using an 
American Immigration Lawyers Association (AILA) certified lawyer
.


International Student and Scholar Services (ISSS) 
cannot
 expedite or impact visa decisions at all. If additional information is requested as part of Administrative Processing, we can work with your academic department in order to provide this information.


Visa Funding



In order for International Student and Scholar Services (ISSS) to issue the immigration documents for a visa, we have to complete a certification of financial support. This shows that the student has sufficient funding to complete an academic year of study in the U.S. This is submitted to the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) through the Student Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS) when the immigration documents are created.


How much is required for visa sponsorship?


The amount required is based on cost of attendance estimates provided by the University of Tennessee 
One Stop Student Services Cost of Attendance
. This is an estimate that accounts for tuition and fees, living expenses, books, and required health insurance.


Important, 
this is an estimate of the cost of attendance for visa sponsorship. You actual cost of attendance may be higher depending on personal lifestyle, inflation, currency conversion, and changes in fees.


Undergraduate Funding Requirements








Tuition and Fees


$31,664






Living Expenses and Books


$19,414






Health Insurance


$2,520






Total Funding for Visa Sponsorship


$53,598 (USD)








Graduate Funding Requirements








Tuition and Fees


$31,798






Living Expenses and Books


$21,458






Health Insurance


$2,520






Total Funding for Visa Sponsorship


$55,776 (USD)








What is required if I want to bring dependents?


You can add your spouse and children to your visa. However, Federal regulations require that additional funding is shown for each person added for sponsorship. The amounts required are listed below. This is based on a requirement exceeding the Federal Poverty Guidelines (FPG) published by the 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
 by 150%. This aligns with 
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) Income Guidelines for Reduced Fees
.








Additional Funding per Dependent


$7,080 (USD)








What documents do I need to show the required funding?


Proof of funding is submitted with the Certification of Financial Resources. This is submitted when you apply for your immigration documents after being admitted. You can find the information on how to submit these documents in our guide 
Getting the Correct Documents for Immigration. 


There are several general requirements for all financial documents. These are:




The documents must be written in English or include an official translation;


the name of the account holder, the currency, the account balance, and the type of account must be clearly stated;


all assets must be liquid, meaning that the funding could be withdrawn immediately;


the statement cannot be dated more than six months in the past.




The types of documents we accept are as follows:




University of Tennessee assistantship, fellowship, or scholarship funding indicated by an official letter;


employment at the University of Tennessee indicated by an official letter including the rate of pay, hours worked, and duration of the appointment;


bank statements, bank letters, or statements of account;


loan letters (not all loan letters are acceptable, the lender must be cleared and approved by ISSS in order to be valid);


external government sponsors, employer sponsorship, international scholarships, and financial guarantees. These must be approved by the Bursar’s Office, and you must complete the necessary billing paperwork for this funding to be valid. Information on this is available at 
Third Party (Sponsor) Billing
.




Who can provide my funding?


Funding can come from several different sources. Acceptable sources include:




Yourself (personal bank statements);


the University of Tennessee;


your home government;


international scholarships and sponsors;


your employer (with official documentation and approval by ISSS);


your spouse;


your parents or legal guardian (proof of guardianship is required).




Funding from friends, relatives, or non-approved organizations is 
not
 acceptable and cannot be used as a proof of funding for immigration. If you have a friend, relative or other organization (for example a religious entity or community organization), the funding 
must 
be transferred to an account in your name in order for the funding to be used for immigration purposes.



